ABSTRACT

Microstrip antenna refers to an antenna fabricated which uses microstrip techniques on a printed circuit board. It is one type of internal antenna which is used mainly in devices and microwave frequencies. The patch antenna has been rapidly used in various fields like space technology, aircrafts, missiles, mobile communication, GPS system, and broadcasting. A microstrip patch antenna is made out of a trace of copper or some other metal of any geometry on one side of a standard printed circuit board (PCB) substrate with opposite side grounded. This antenna can be fed utilizing coaxial, stripline, opening coupling or vicinity coupling strategies. This Antenna is getting popularity over the decades because it has some very well-known advantages. Such as- light weight, low profile, easy and low cost fabrication, planar but also conformal to non-planar geometrics, mechanical robustness, easy integration of components, easy association in arrays and versatility in terms of electromagnetic characteristics.


This work was started with designing Microstrip Patch antenna with different shaped. This work includes circular, F letter shaped, triangular, square and hexagonal shape antenna. And the most important part is all these antennas are designed with same area sand same frequency range. Among these shapes, Circular shape performs well comparing with others. The parameters like- Return loss, bandwidth, gain etc. which are calculated throughout the work showed a good result for circular shape. The designing and simulation of the antenna is carried out using CST microwave studio and fabrication is done in our laboratory.


The microstrip patch antenna identification is a growing technology and it is defined and applied for different processes. Before purchasing and installing the equipment, besides learning basic required knowledge, all possible economic and technical aspects in this area should be analyzed for optimal use of this technology. In the meantime, system environmental conditions and required information and equipment which can be effective in increasing costs and reducing the desirability of system are very important factors. In this regard, complete use of available resources and especially receiving and reviewing technical and costs proposals from qualified suppliers, is necessary for choosing appropriate system components and making a final decision. Due to high costs and economic evaluation results of implementation and deployment of this system, this technology is not yet fully developed as it is supposed to be. But due to its rapid development during recent years and predictable decrease in its implementation costs, it is anticipated that this technology will be widely used in the near future. 


This work was started with designing microstrip patch antenna with different shaped. This work includes circular, F letter shaped, triangular, square and hexagonal shaped antenna. And the most important part was that all these antennas were designed with same area and same frequency range. Among these shapes, Circular shape showed a better performance comparing with others. The parameters like- Return loss, bandwidth, gain, efficiency etc. which were calculated throughout the work showed a good result for circular shape. A comparison table was given for all those five antennas mentioning all the parameters. Comparison of return losses which are found from CST simulation and Vector Network Analyzer (VNA) is also mentioned with proper figure. Basically this is a work to study the basic parameter’s changes for different shaped antennas while frequency and area are kept same as well.
